# GitHub

## Overview of Git/GitHub

### Version Control
A version control system allows you to keep track of changes to your documents. This makes it easy for you to recover older versions of your document if you make a mistake, and it makes collaboration with others much easier. Here is an example to illustrate how version control works. Let’s say you’ve got a shopping list and you want your roommates to confirm the things you need and add additional items. Without version control, you’ve got a big mess to clean up before you can go shopping. With version control, you know exactly what you need after everyone has contributed their ideas.

### Git
Git is free and open source software distributed under the GNU General Public License. Git is a distributed version control system, which means that users anywhere in the world can have a copy of your project on their own computer. When they’ve made changes, they can sync their version to a remote server to share it with you. Git isn’t the only version control system out there, but the distributed aspect is one of the main reasons it’s become one of the most common version control systems available. Version control systems are widely used for things involving code, but you can also version control images, documents, and any number of file types. You can use Git without a web interface by using your command line interface, but GitHub is one of the most popular web-hosted services for Git repositories. Others include GitLab, BitBucket, and Beanstalk.

### Short Glossary
The SSH protocol is a method for secure remote login from one computer to another. A repository contains your project folders that are set up for version control. A fork is a copy of a repository. A pull request is the way you request that someone reviews and approves your changes before they become final. A working directory contains the files and subdirectories on your computer that are associated with a Git repository.

### Basic Git Commands
When starting out with a new repository, you only need create it once: either locally, and then push to GitHub, or by cloning an existing repository by using the command "git init". "git add" moves changes from the working directory to the staging area. "git status" allows you to see the state of your working directory and the staged snapshot of your changes. "git commit" takes your staged snapshot of changes and commits them to the project. "git reset" undoes changes that you’ve made to the files in your working directory. "git log" enables you to browse previous changes to a project. "git branch" lets you create an isolated environment within your repository to make changes. "git checkout" lets you see and change existing branches. "git merge" lets you put everything back together again.

## Introduction to GitHub

### Background of Git
Linux development in the early 2000’s was managed under a free-to-use system known as BitKeeper. In 2005, BitKeeper changed to a for-fee system which was problematic for Linux developers for many reasons. Linus Torvalds led a team to develop a replacement source-version control system. The project ran in a short a timeframe and the key characteristics were defined by a small group. These include:
Strong support for non-linear development. (Linux patches were then arriving at a rate of 6.7 patches per second) 
Distributed development. Each developer can have a local copy of the full development history.
Compatibility with existing systems and protocols. This was necessary to acknowledge the diversity of the Linux community.
Efficient handling of large projects.
Cryptographic authentication of history. This makes certain that distributed systems all have identical code updates. 
Pluggable merge strategies. Many pathways of development can lead to complex integration decisions that might require explicit integration strategies.

### Git Repository Model
What is special about the Git Repository model? Git is designed as a distributed version-control system. Primarily focused on tracking source code during development. Contains elements to coordinate among programmers, track changes, and support non-linear workflows. Created in 2005 by Linus Torvalds for distribution of Linux kernels.

### What is Git?
Git is a distributed version-control system that is used to track changes to content. It serves as a central point for collaboration with a particular focus on agile development methodologies. In a central version control system, every developer needs to check out code from the central system and commit back into it. As Git is a distributed version control, each developer has a local copy of the full development history, and changes are copied from one such repository to another. Each developer can act as a hub. When Git is used correctly, there is a main branch that corresponds to the deployable code. Teams can continuously integrate changes that are ready to be released and can simultaneously work on separate branches in between releases.
Git also allows centralized administration of tasks with access-level controls for each team. Git can co-exist locally such as through the GitHub Desktop client or it can be used directly through a browser connected to the GitHub web interface. 
IBM Cloud is based on sound and established open-source tools including Git repositories, often called repos.

### What is GitHub?
GitHub is an online hosting service for Git repositories. GitHub hosted by a subsidiary of Microsoft. GitHub offers free, professional and enterprise accounts. As of August 2019, GitHub had over 100M repositories.
A Repository is: A data structure for storing documents including application source code. A repository can track and maintain version-control.

### What is GitLab?
GitLab is a complete DevOps platform, delivered as a single application. GitLab provides access to Git repositories, controlled by source code management. With GitLab, developers can: Collaborate, reviewing code, making comments and helping to improve each other’s code. Work from their own local copy of the code. Branch and merge code when required. Streamline testing and delivery with Built-in Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD).

## GitHub repositories (TODO: delete this)

Start at the GitHub site, https://github.com You’ll need to choose a username, enter your email address and select a password, then click Sign up for GitHub. Next, you’ll have a short test to prove that you’re a person. Click Verify and solve the puzzle presented. When you’re done, click join a free plan and then you’ll be taken to a screen where you can select the type of account – most likely a free, personal account is all that you’ll want. Choose to set up a personal, free account, which is the default. GitHub asks some questions about your work, programming experience and interests. You can skip these if you want. Finally, you’ll have to respond to an email that you receive which proves that you linked to GitHub from an account that you access GitHub provides you with some starting points. You can choose to create a repository or an organization, or you can take the Introduction to GitHub course. Remember, a repository is a data structure for storing documents including application source code which tracks and maintains version-control. An organization is a collection of user accounts that owns repositories. Organizations have one or more owners, who have administrative privileges for the organization. Or you can skip this for now and get straight to work. GitHub provides many resources to help you work effectively. When you have time, read the GitHub guide. The heart of a Git-based project is the repository. This contains all your code and the related artifacts, including things like: A README file to describe the purpose of the project. A license to express the ways in which people can use your code, Etc. You can also make your repository private (only available to people with accounts that have permission to see it) or public (searchable and seen by everyone). When you create your repository, you’ll notice that it has a number of tabs, and is 37 00:02:34,310 --&gt; 00:02:37,069 opened to the Code tab.
Code – this is where all the source files reside. Git was initially created as a source code repository and now all sorts of files end up in here. If you created a README and/or license, that’s all that’s here right now. Issues – as you can imagine, you can track and plan with tools such as “Issues” that lists all open items against your project base. Pull Requests – this is part of the mechanism for collaborating with other users. Pull requests define changes that are committed and ready for review before being merged into the main branch. Projects – all the tools for managing, sorting, planning, etc. your various projects. This is the core of the collaborative power of GitHub. Wiki, Security, and Insights – often left for more advanced users, these tools provide a communication base to the external user community. Settings – GitHub allows for a lot of personalization, including changing the name of your repository and controlling access. In this video, you learned: How to create and verify a GitHub account. Repositories are storage structures that can hold Code, track Issues, and enable you to collaborate with others.

## GitHub - Getting Started

Let’s start by creating a new repository. Click + then click New Repository. To create a new repository, you need to provide these details: give your new repository a name; optionally, add a description of your repository; choose the repository visibility - whether you  want it to be public or private; and choose the option to Initialize this repository with readme file. Then click Create Repository.
You will now be redirected to the  repository you have created. The root folder of your repository is listed  by default and it has just one file ReadMe.md.  
Now, it’s time to edit the readme. You can do this in your browser. Just click the pencil to open the online editor and you can change the text of the  readme. To save your changes to the repository, you must commit them. After you have made your  changes, scroll down to the Commit changes section. Add a commit message and optionally add a description, then click Commit changes. The "commit changes" is used to save your changes  to the repository. Go back to the home screen by clicking the repository name link. Note that the  readme file is updated and verify your changes.  
Let’s learn how to create a new file using the built-in web editor provided by GitHub which runs in the browser. Click Add File, then  click Create New File to create the new file.
To create a python file called firstpython.py. First, provide the file name. Next, add a comment that describes your code, then add the code.
Once finished, commit the change to the  repository. You can see that your file is   now added to the repository and the repository  listing shows when the file was added or changed. When you need to change the  file, you can edit it again. Click the file name, and then click the pencil  icon, make your edits and commit the changes.
You can also upload a file from your  local system into the repository. From the home screen of the repository, click  Add File and choose the Upload files option. 
Click Choose Your Files and select the files you want to upload from your local system.
The file upload process may take a short time, depending on what you are uploading. Once the files finish uploading,   click Commit Changes. The repository now reflects the files that were uploaded.


## GitHub - Working with Branches

### What is a branch?
A branch is a snapshot of your repository to which you can make changes. It is a copy of the master branch and can be used to develop and test workflow changes before merging it into the master branch. In Git and GitHub, there is a main branch called master. It has the deployable code and is the official working version of your project. It is meant to be stable, thus, it is advisable not to push any code that has not been tested in the master. If you want to change the code and the workflow in the master branch, you can create a copy of the master branch. This can be the child branch that will be a copy of the workflow. 

### Why create a branch?
In the child branch, changes and experiments are done. You can build, make edits, test the changes, and when you are satisfied with them, you can merge them back to the master branch, where you can prepare the model for deployment. You can see that all of this is done outside the main branch and until you merge, changes will not be made to the workflow before you branched.

### Merging multiple branch
To ensure that changes done by one member, do not impede or affect the workflow of other members, multiple branches can be created and merged appropriately with the master after the workflow is properly tested and approved. To create branches in GitHub, let’s look at this repository. There is currently one branch in the repository. You want to make some changes but don’t want to alter the master in case something goes wrong, so you will create a branch. To do that, you will click the drop-down arrow and create a new branch. Name the new branch ‘child branch’ and then click enter. The repository now has two branches, the master and child branches. You can check this by selecting the child branch in the Branch selector drop-down list. All the content in the master branch is copied to the child branch. However, you can add files in the child branch without adding any to the master branch. To add a file, ensure the child branch is selected in the branch selector drop-down list. Then click Create new file. In the space provided, name the file ‘test child dot py’ and then add a few lines of code. You can print the statement inside the child branch. At the bottom of the screen, you will see a section, ‘Commit new file.’ **Commit messages** are important as they help to keep track of the changes made. Add a descriptive commit message for the convenience of the team. Here you can add ‘Create test child dot py.’ Then click Commit new file. The file is added to the child branch. You can verify by going to the master branch by clicking ‘master’ from the Branch selector menu, and you can see that the new file is not added to the master branch. After you have created the new file, test and ensure it is working. You can merge the changes in the child branch to reflect in the master branch by creating a Pull Request (PR). **Pull requests** show the differences in the content from both branches. It can notify other team members of the changes and edits to the main branch. Ideally, another team member reviews the changes and approves them to be merged with the Master branch. Pull requests are a means of collaboration on GitHub. When you open a pull request, you propose your changes. You can assign team members to review and approve your contribution and merge in the target branch. To open a pull request to see the differences between the branches, click Compare and pull request. If you scroll down to the bottom of the screen, you will see the comparison between both branches. It shows that one file has changed, and the file has two additions, the two lines you added to the file with zero deletions. You will now create the pull request. Add the title and an optional comment. Click Create pull request. The next screen will show the details of the pull request. If you are okay with the changes, click Merge pull request and then click Confirm. You will get a confirmation that the pull request has been successfully merged. You can delete the branch if you no longer need to edit or add new information. Now, the child branch has completely merged with the Master branch. You can check the Master branch and verify it contains the test child dot py file. 

