# Careers and Recruiting in Data Science

## How Can Someone Become a Data Scientist? (Norman White)

A real data scientist, the high-end data scientists, are mostly PhDs. They often come out of physics, out of statistics, they have to have a computer science background, they have to have a math background, they have to know about databases and statistics and probability and all that stuff.
However, if you're coming into a data science team, I think the first skills you need is you need to know how to program, at least **have some computational thinking**, so having taken a programing course, you need to know some **algebra**, at least up to **analytics, geometry**, and hopefully some **calculus**, some basic **probability**, some basic **statistics**, I mean really have to understand the difference and different statistical distributions, and database. I mean, one of the easiest places to start is **relational databases**, which stores lots and lots of our data so people can first walk before they can run by at least understanding about computers and databases and how we store things and if you understand relational databases nowadays you can still, just with that understanding, use big data clusters as if they were just a big relational database. You don't have to really have understand the whole **MapReduce programming model**. But then, as you go further up in the field, then you have to know a lot of **computer science theory and statistics**, it's really, and probability, it's really the intersection of them that the high end data scientists, the PhD data scientists work with.

I do a lot of self-learning. I think everybody these days, I mean, I learned about Hadoop all by myself, I read some articles, I watched some videos, I thought, I played, although I'm a builder, I'm a tinkerer, so if I wanna figure out how to do something, I build it. I mean, my first HPC cluster I heard about this term a Beowulf cluster, I mean, yeah, what the hell's that? So I looked it up and said, oh, it's just a bunch of computers hooked together with a TCP/IP network, that's pretty easy, so we get a grant from Citi Bank and we built a five thing cluster and I said, oh, well, that's HPC. I said, I had one of the first HPC clusters at the university, it was tiny but a lot of our researchers loved it because they could run stuff 40 and 50 times faster. **So I think one of the ways you learn things is you do them, you have to do them**, and these online learning platforms especially now that we have things like IPython and Jupyter Notebooks and I guess Zeppelin means that you can actually go in and take some of these courses and **you can do things right then and you can see them and feel them and play with them and, at that point, you know, you'll start to get your head around what is actually happening**. Motivation is the key problem in all of these, is how to keep people motivated and I think the badge system that the, what was it, Big Data University has, is one of the ways is how do you get people to keep going through. But if they want to, they can. It's up to the individual to. So they have to understand what the goal is.

The place it can't sit is probably under the CIO, the Chief Information Officer. CIOs current chief information officers in many companies got there from an accounting background or a finance background, they're clueless. Sorry. But they really, it has to come out of the research side. So you'll **find data scientists primarily in companies that have some research agenda, pharmaceuticals, finance, all of, any technology company**. If you look at, we can't keep some of our PhD data scientists in our program, they are now at Facebook, they're at Linkedin, they're at Uber, they're at Lyft, because the demand out there for the PhD level data scientist is just unbelievable. They make large amounts of money and they're playing with problems that are really, really neat. How do you schedule the Uber cars? You have enormous amounts of data.

## Recruiting for Data Science

(Murtaza Haider) When the companies are hiring people for a data science team, maybe a data scientist or an analyst, or a chief data scientist, the tendency would be to find the person who has all the skills, that they know the domain-specific knowledge. **They're excellent in analyzing structured and unstructured data. And they're great at presenting and they've got great storytelling skills**. So if you put all this together, you will realize you're looking for a unicorn. And your odds of finding a unicorn are pretty rare. I think what you need to do to is to see, given the pool of applicants you have, who has the most **resonance with your firm's DNA**. Because you can teach analytics skills, anyone can learn analytics skills if they dedicate time and effort to it. But **what really matters is who's passionate about the kind of business that you do**. Someone could be a great data scientist in the retail environment, but they may not be that excited about working in IT related firms or working with gigabytes of weblogs. But if someone is excited about those weblogs, if someone is excited about health-related data then they would be able to contribute to your productivity much more so.
And I would say if I'm looking for someone, if I have to put together a data science team, I would first look for **curiosity**. Is that person curious about things not just for data science but anything like, are they curious about why this room is painted a certain way, why do the bookshelves have books, and what kinds of books? They have to have a **certain degree of curiosity about everything that is in their vision**, that they look at.
The second thing is do they have a **sense of humor** because, you see, you have to have a lighthearted about it. If someone is too serious about it, they probably would take it too seriously, and would not be able to look at the lighter elements.
The third thing I think, and I think the last thing that I would look for if I had to have a hierarchy, the last thing I would look for are **technical skills**. I would go through the social skills, curiosity, and sense of humor. The ability to tell a story. The ability to know that there is a story there. And then once all is there then I would say, well, can you do the technical side of it? And if there is some hope or some sign of some technical skills, I would take them because I can train them in whatever skills they need. But I cannot teach curiosity. I cannot teach storytelling. I cannot certainly, instill sense of humor in anyone.


(Shingai Manjengwa) I think there's no hard and fast rule for hiring data scientists. I think it's going to be a case by case thing. I would say there has to be some sort of **technical component**, somebody should be able to work with and manipulate the data. They should be able to **communicate** what they find in the data. I find quite often nobody really cares about the r-square or the confidence interval. So you have to be able to introduce those things and explain something in a compelling way. And they also have to find somebody who is **relatable**, because data science, it been typically new means that the person in that role has to make relationships and they have to work across different departments. 

(Rafael B. Da Silva) If these data scientist has a good mathematics and statistics background.

(Luis O. Martins) They have to consider like **problem solving abilities and analysis**. The scientist needs to be good in analyzing problems.

(Mandeep Kaur) The persons they are hiring, they should love to play with data. And then they know how to play with the data visualization. They have analytical thinking.

(Stephen Sherman) When a company is hiring anyone to work on a data science team, they need to think about what role that person is going to take. Before a company begins, they need to **understand what they want out of their data science team**. And then they need to hire to begin it. As they grow a data science team, they need to understand whether they need engineers, architects, designers to work on visualization. Or whether they just need more people who can multiply large matrices. 

(Murtaza Haider) From a skills point of view, let's focus on the technical skills and in that case, first thing would be what kind of a **technical platform** would you like to adopt? Let's say you want to work in a structured data environment and let's say you want to work in market research. Then the type of skills you need are slightly different than someone who would like to work in big data environments.
If you want to work in the **traditional market research data**, structure data environment, your skills should be some statistical knowledge and some knowledge of basic statistical algorithms, maybe some machine learning algorithms. And these are the tools that you would like to develop.
If you want to work in **big data**, then there's the other aspect of it and that is to be able to store data. So you start with the expertise in storing large amounts of data. And then you look into platforms that allow you to do that. The next step would be to be able to manipulate large amounts of data, and the final step would be to apply algorithms to those large sets of data. So it's a three-step process. But most likely it starts, most importantly, it starts with where you would like to be, in what field, in what domain.
In terms of **platforms**, let's you want to be in the traditional predictive analytics environment, and you're not working with big data, then R or Stata, or Python would be your tools. If you're working mostly with** unstructured data, then Python is most suitable than R**. If you're working with big data, then Hadoop and Spark are the environments that you will be working with. So it all depends upon where you would like to be and what kind of work excites you and then you pick your tools.
In addition to technical skills, the second aspect of the data science is to have the **ability to communicate**. The communication skills or presentation skills. I call them story telling skills, that is that you have your analysis done, now can you tell a great story from it? If you have a very large table, can you synthesize this and make it more appealing that when it goes on the screen, or is it part of a document that it just speaks? It sings the findings and the reader just gets it right there. So the ability to present your findings, either verbally, or in a presentation, or in a document. So those communication and presentation skills are equally important as the technical skills are.
When you have a grading side, when you're presenting your results, imagine you're driving on a mountain and then there's a sharp turn. And you can't see what's beyond the turn. And then you make that turn and then suddenly, you see a tremendous valley in front of you. And this great sense of awe, that I didn't know that, right? So **when you present your findings and you have this great finding and you communicate it well**, this is what people feel because they were not expecting it. They were not aware of it, and then this great sense of happiness that now I know. And I didn't know this, now I know. And then it empowers them, it gives them ideas, what they can do with this knowledge, this new insight. It's a great sense of joy. And you are able as a data scientist, you are able to share with your clients because you enabled it. 

## Careers in Data Science

The emergence of **Internet of things** and advances in **distributed computing** have brought vast amounts of data and the technological capability to analyze it. Now that we can extract useful insights and new knowledge, we need to know how to shape that data to focus on what to do with it and what it can do for us. Enter data science.

Companies like LinkedIn, Glassdoor, Indeed, and Dice **track employment trends** which show a career in data science moving up the list of most promising jobs to become number one since 2016. It remains one of the top three career choices for 2020. Dice noted that job postings are from companies in a wide variety of industries, not just tech. 

Global Industry Analysts Incorporated predicts that the data science platform market will grow by $314.8 billion US by 2025, driven by a compounded growth of 38.2%. McKinsey Global Institute warned of huge talent shortages for data and analytics by 2018. Forrester Research Analyst Brandon Purcell said, in January of 2019, the demand for data scientists will only grow as organizations increasingly rely on data-driven insights.
We're now well into that period, and recruiters are finding it difficult to fill the growing need for talented data scientists.

- What motivates someone going into a data science?
For one thing, **data science applies to almost any discipline**. So if you have the aptitude and desire to work with data, enjoy coding, have no problem learning math and statistics, and you are a good storyteller, then you can certainly enter a data science field and excel.
For most people, this means **acquiring additional tools and skills and continuously learning about new tools and techniques in the field**. The women in data science initiative spearheaded by the Stanford Institute for Computational and Mathematical Computing have committed to inspire and educate data scientists worldwide, regardless of gender and to support women in the field.

When you are seeking a career in data science, you need to make sure your skill set matches the role you are targeting. You can tailor your skill set to the specific area you want to enter, adding missing skills via one of the many excellent online training resources. Then you'll be prepared for a fascinating and rewarding career. So now it is time to move into this field, when there are such diverse choices available and education resources that make it a reality.

## Importance of Mathematics and Statistics for Data Science

(Norman White) Learn how to program. Learn some math. Take a course in probability. Learn a little bit of statistics. And then, play. Build something, write something. I mean, when I say build, programming and building systems, building things isn't just physical, right? You can build computer systems, statistical systems, whatever. But once you try to do something, then you'll know what tools you need, right? And you'll say, "Oh, oh my god, what? "There's this expression there, "what does an inner product mean? "What's that? "How do I, oh, okay, I can learn that." And then when they get to college, they will have a big jump on many of the other college students. And so when they get out of college, they'll have an even bigger jump, and then make a lot of money. And they'll be happy, too. This stuff is fun, right? It's fun. 

(Jeff Sternberg) If you're in high school and you're considering data science, I would say get familiar with data bases, start learning SQL, start thinking about, you know, computer science, if that's interesting. If you have a computer science course in your school, you know, take it, and that's a good part of being a data scientist. Beyond that there are probably ways to foster your creativity, right, your curiosity. If you like detective games, that's kind of cool, right. And if you like treasure hunts or whatever, right, if you're into that stuff, I think you'll, and you get the opportunity to do that stuff, that will help you as a data scientist because it's a really a good way to kind of make sure that you can be curious as you go about your daily life. 
Encourage the curiosity, encourage the experimentation. It's kind of like science fairs, science fairs are great, they encourage that experimentation, that learning from, asking a question and answering it through a scientific method, but doing that with data sets rather than vinegar volcanoes. It's kind of the same thing, but learning from data and we're going through an election season right now, there's a lot of stuff in the news about polls and survey results and that's a great way to start a conversation and talk about how do the people who ran the polls, how do they know, how can they predict what's going to happen in the election. So that's another cool way to start a conversation about data science.
I would say encourage the person who is interested in data science because to pursue to, because it's a great career and it is something that is definitely going to be in need in the future. It's one of those highly sought after knowledge professions that are really important to businesses around the world. So being a data scientist and being able to help companies as they grow and learn how do to things more efficiently or how to do things smarter, there will always be a need for people like that. And data scientists are those people.
I would say that I understand what you're talking about because I was never a great mathematics student as well. And I think there's actually a bunch of data scientist, who are really successful and popular, who are in the same boat. You know there's kind of arithmetic and math in school is not necessarily everybody's best subject. But when you combine it with, you know these aren't just hypothetical numbers, these aren't just, problem statements that you have no connection to. When you have a connection to the problem, it suddenly becomes much easier to use math to help understand it, I found. And so you know, knowing the people who will benefit from the math that you do I think is really cool.

## The Report Structure

Before starting the analysis, think about the **structure of the report**. Will it be a brief report of five or fewer pages, or will it be a longer document running more than 100 pages in length? **The structure of the report depends on the length of the document**. A brief report is more to the point and presents a summary of key findings. A detailed report incrementally builds the argument and contains details about other relevant works, research methodology, data sources, and intermediate findings along with the main results.

I have reviewed reports by leading consultants including Deloitte and McKinsey. I found that the length of the reports varied depending largely on the purpose of the report. Brief reports were drafted as commentaries on current trends and developments that attracted public or media attention. Detailed and comprehensive reports offered a critical review of the subject matter with extensive data analysis and commentary. Often, detailed reports collected new data or interviewed industry experts to answer the research questions.

Even if you expect the report to be brief, sporting five or fewer pages, I recommend that the **deliverable follow a prescribed format** including the cover page, table of contents, executive summary, detailed contents, acknowledgments, references, and appendices (if needed).

I often find the cover page to be missing in documents. It is not the inexperience of undergraduate students that is reflected in submissions that usually miss the cover page. In fact, doctoral candidates also require an explicit reminder to include an informative cover page. I hasten to mention that the business world sleuths are hardly any better. Just search the Internet for reports and you will find plenty of reports from reputed firms that are missing the cover page.

At a minimum, the **cover page** should include the title of the report, names of authors, their affiliations, and contacts, the name of the institutional publisher (if any), and the date of publication. I have seen numerous reports missing the date of publication, making it impossible to cite them without the year and month of publication. Also, from a business point of view, authors should make it easier for the reader to reach out to them. Having contact details at the front makes the task easier.

"A **table of contents** (ToC)" is like a map needed for a trip never taken before. You need to have a sense of the journey before embarking on it. A map provides a visual proxy for the actual travel with details about the landmarks that you will pass by in your trip. The ToC with main headings and lists of tables and figures offers a glimpse of what lies ahead in the document. Never shy away from including a ToC, especially if your document, excluding cover page, table of contents, and references, is five or more pages in length.

Even for a short document, I recommend an **"abstract" or an "executive summary"**. Nothing is more powerful than explaining the crux of your arguments in three paragraphs or less. Of course, for larger documents running a few hundred pages, the executive summary could be longer.

An **"introductory section"** is always helpful in setting up the problem for the reader who might be new to the topic and who might need to be gently introduced to the subject matter before being immersed in intricate details. A good follow-up to the introductory section is a review of available relevant research on the subject matter. The length of the literature review section depends upon how contested the subject matter is. In instances where the vast majority of researchers have concluded in one direction, the literature review could be brief with citations for only the most influential authors on the subject. On the other hand, if the arguments are more nuanced with caveats aplenty, then you must cite the relevant research to offer adequate context before you embark on your analysis. You might use the literature review to highlight gaps in the existing knowledge, which your analysis will try to fill. This is where you formally introduce your research questions and hypothesis.

In the **"methodology"** section, you introduce the research methods and data sources you used for the analysis. If you have collected new data, explain the data collection exercise in some detail. You will refer to the literature review to bolster your choice for variables, data, and methods and how they will help you answer your research questions.

The **results** section is where you present your empirical findings. Starting with descriptive statistics (see Chapter 4, "Serving Tables") and illustrative graphics (see Chapter S, "Graphic Details" for plots and Chapter 10, "Spatial Data Analytics" for maps), you will move toward formally testing your hypothesis (see Chapter 6, "Hypothetically Speaking").

In case you need to run statistical models, you might turn to regression models (see Chapter 7, "Why Tall Parents Don't Have Even Taller Children") or categorical analysis (see Chapters 8, "To Be or Not to Be" and 2., "Categorically Speaking About Categorical Data"). If you are working with time-series data, you can turn to Chapter 11, Doing Serious Time with Time Series. You can also report results from other empirical techniques that fall under the general rubric of data mining (see Chapter 12, "Data Mining for Gold"). Note that many reports in the business sector present results in a more palatable fashion by holding back the statistical details and relying on illustrative graphics to summarize the results.

The results section is followed by the discussion section, where you craft your main arguments by building on the results you have presented earlier.

The **"discussion section"** is where you rely on the power of narrative to enable numbers to communicate your thesis to your readers. You refer the reader to the research question and the knowledge gaps you identified earlier. You highlight how your findings provide the ultimate missing piece to the puzzle.

Of course, not all analytics return a smoking gun. At times, more frequently than I would like to acknowledge, the results provide only a partial answer to the question and that, too, with a long list of caveats.

In the **"conclusion"** section, you generalize your specific findings and take on a rather marketing approach to promote your findings so that the reader does not remain stuck in the caveats that you have voluntarily outlined earlier. You might also identify future possible developments in research and applications that could result from your research.

What remains is housekeeping, including a list of references, the acknowledgment section (acknowledging the support of those who have enabled your work is always good), and "appendices", if needed.

### Have You Done Your Job as a Writer?
As a data scientist, you are expected to do thorough analysis with the appropriate data, deploying the appropriate tools. As a writer, you are responsible for communicating your findings to the readers. Transport Policy, a leading research publication in transportation planning, offers a checklist for authors interested in publishing with the journal. The checklist is a series of questions authors are expected to consider before submitting their manuscripts to the journal. I believe the checklist is useful for budding data scientists and, therefore, I have reproduced it verbatim for their benefit.

- Have you told readers, at the outset, what they might gain by reading your paper?
- Have you made the aim of your work clear?
- Have you explained the significance of your contribution?
- Have you set your work in the appropriate context by giving sufficient background (including a complete set of relevant references) to your work?
- Have you addressed the question of practicality and usefulness?
- Have you identified future developments that might result from your work?
- Have you structured your paper in a clear and logical fashion?


## Lesson Summary

Amidst the diverse backgrounds from which data scientists emerge, you also find they share qualities and skills that consistently set them apart from other data related roles.

- Recruiting
Companies recruiting data scientists may seem to want data scientists to have it all. They may seek a person who has all the desired skills, ranging from domain specific knowledge to proficiency in analyzing both structured and unstructured data, as well as skills in presenting and storytelling. Realistically, this person is a rare find. Instead, companies need to develop teams of people who work together who have these skills rather than seeking out individuals who have all of these qualities. They also may need to seek out individuals with potential and help them develop the skills they need. What really matters is they find someone passionate about the kind of business that they do. 

- Excitement results in productivity
Companies should look for someone excited about working with the data in their particular industry. They should seek out someone curious who can ask interesting, meaningful questions about the types of data they intend to collect. For example, a person who could be a great data scientist in the retail environment may not be excited about working in IT related firms or working with gigabytes of health related web logs. Companies will find that excitement results in high productivity.

- Curious thinker
That excitement also relates back to **curiosity**, which we discussed in another lesson as an important trait for a data scientist. Someone excited about their field is likely to be curious and find the right questions to ask. Constantly wondering why things are the way that they are helps you stay motivated and engaged. Similarly, self-learning and tinkering are also helpful traits.

- Logic minded
As a data scientist, you should love to play with data and create data visualizations. You need to **think analytically and computationally**. You need a strong background in mathematics, statistics, and probability to reach valid conclusions with that data.

- Computer programming
You also need **computer programming skills**. Tools may vary with the type of data that you'll work with. Though common languages include Python and R, an open source programming language developed for statistical analysis. Because data scientists work with large quantities of stored data, you must also understand data storage and retrieval systems with structured and unstructured data. With artificial intelligence, you also need to know common machine learning algorithms to gain insights from their data.

- Creating the narrative
One or more persons from the data science team at an organization will write a report as the final step of the analysis, so **communication, instructional and presentational skills, and storytelling skills** are also important. The report synthesizes these large amounts of data to create a narrative that engages and surprises the reader. 

- Reporting
A clearly organized and logical report should communicate the following to the reader, **what they gain by reading the report, clearly defined goals, the significance of your contribution**. Appropriate context by giving sufficient background, why this work is practical and useful, and conjugate plausible future developments that might result from your work.

- The unexpected
As Dr. Hader explained, imagine your reader is driving on a mountain. There's a sharp turn ahead, and they can't see what's beyond the turn. They go around the curve and suddenly they see a tremendous valley in front of them, they experience this great sense of awe. So, when you were presenting this great finding and communicating it well, this is what people feel because they were not expecting it.

- Summary
In summary, companies need to look for individuals to create a data science team and be cautious about trying to find all the desired skills in a single individual. On that team, they should have curious people who understand the subject matter well, people who love working with the data and those with statistics, mathematics, machine learning and computer programming expertise. Lastly and possibly most importantly, they need a skilled storyteller who can present the team's findings in a creative and engaging way.
