# Data Science Application Domains

## How Should Companies Get Started in Data Science?

At the end of the day, for businesses, they know one thing, that if they are unable to measure something, they are unable to improve it. And if they are unable to measure their costs, they are unable to reduce them. If they're unable to measure their profits, they are unable to increase them.

So the first thing a company has to do is to start recording information, **start capturing data**, data about costs. And the differentiate it by labor costs and material cost, the cost to how much it cost to sell one product and the total cost. And then you look at the revenue, where's your revenue coming from? Is 80% of your revenue coming from 20% of your customers? Or is it the other way around? So first thing first, start capturing data. Once you have data, then you can apply algorithms and analytics to it. So the first thing to do would be to capture data. If you're not capturing it, start capturing it. If you're capturing it, archive it. Do not overwrite on your old data thinking you don't need it anymore. Data never gets old. **Data is always relevant**, even if it's 100 years old, 200 years old. It is relevant to you and and your firm and your success. So keep data, capture it, archive it, make sure nothing goes to waste. **Make sure there's a consistency**. So someone 20 years later trying to understand, that data should be able to do so, so have proper documentation. Do it now. Put the best practices for data archiving in place the moment you start a business. And if you're already in business and you haven't done it, do it now.

Start measuring things. Too many companies haven't measured things properly for a decade and, then they decide, they want data science. Data science inside a company is only going to be as valuable as the data collected. **Garbage in, garbage out is a rule in any sort of analysis**.

If something is not measured, it's very difficult to improve it or to change it. So the very first step is measurement. If companies have existing data, then they should start looking at it and cleaning it. If they don't have existing data, then they need to start collecting it. 

I think to look for a team who love to work as a data scientist. 

The first stop is to have employees, that they are interested on data science. because if you don't have interest in your company, you will not have engagement. 

Companies should remember, that it's key to have a team. So it's not one data scientist, but a team of them, that each of them have strengths in different areas of data science.

## Old Problems, New Data Science Solutions
Organizations can leverage the almost unlimited amount of data now available to them in a growing number of ways. However, all organizations ultimately use data science for the same reason—to discover optimum solutions to existing problems.

In **transport, Uber** collects real-time user data to discover how many drivers are available, if more are needed, and if they should allow a surge charge to attract more drivers. Uber uses data to put the right number of drivers in the right place, at the right time, for a cost the rider is willing to pay. 

In a different transport related data science effort, the Toronto Transportation Commission has made great strides in **solving an old problem with traffic flows**, restructuring those flows in and around the city. Using data science tools and analysis, they have: Gathered data to better understand streetcar operations, and identify areas for interventions Analyzed customer complaints data, Used probe data to better understand traffic performance on main routes and created a team to better capitalize on big data for both planning, operations and evaluation By focusing on peak hour clearances and identifying the most congested routes, monthly hours lost for commuters due to traffic congestion dropped from 4.75 hrs. in 2010 to 3 hrs. in mid-2014. 

In facing issues in our environment, **data science** can also play a **proactive role**. Freshwater lakes supply a variety of human and ecological needs, such as providing drinking water and producing food. But lakes across the world are threatened by increasing incidences of harmful cyanobacterial blooms. There are many projects and studies to solve this long-existing dilemma. In the US, a team of scientists from research centers stretching from Maine to South Carolina is developing and deploying high-tech tools to explore cyanobacteria in lakes across the east coast. The team is using robotic boats, buoys, and camera-equipped drones to measure physical, chemical, and biological data in lakes where cyanobacteria are detected, collecting large volumes of data related to the lakes and the development of the harmful blooms. The project is also building new algorithmic models to assess the findings. The information collected will lead to **better predictions** of when and where cyanobacterial blooms take place, enabling proactive approaches to protect public health in recreational lakes and in those that supply drinking water. 

Such interdisciplinary training prepares the next generation of scientists to address societal issues with the proper modernized data science tools. It takes gathering a lot of data, cleaning and preparing it, and then analyzing it to gain the insight needed to develop better solutions for today's enterprises. How do you get a **better solution** that is efficient? You must: **Identify the problem and establish a clear understanding of it**. Gather the data for analysis. Identify the **right tools** to use, and develop a **data strategy**. Case studies are also helpful in customizing a potential solution. Once these conditions exist and available data is extracted, you can develop a machine learning model. It will take time for an organization to refine best practices for data strategy using data science, but the benefits are worth it.

## Applications of Data Science
Data science and big data are making an undeniable impact on businesses, changing day-to-day operations, financial analytics, and especially interactions with customers. It's clear that businesses can gain enormous value from the insights data science can provide. But sometimes it's hard to see exactly how.

In this era of big data, almost everyone generates masses of data every day, often without being aware of it. This digital trace reveals the patterns of our online lives. If you have ever searched for or bought a product on a site like Amazon, you'll notice that it starts making recommendations related to your search. This type of system known as a recommendation engine is a common application of data science. 

Companies like Amazon, Netflix, and Spotify use **algorithms to make specific recommendations derived from customer preferences and historical behavior**. Personal assistants like Siri on Apple devices use data science to devise answers to the infinite number of questions end users may ask. Google watches your every move in the world, you're online shopping habits, and your social media. Then it analyzes that data to create recommendations for restaurants, bars, shops, and other attractions based on the data collected from your device and your current location. Wearable devices like Fitbits, Apple watches, and Android watches add information about your activity levels, sleep patterns, and heart rate to the data you generate. 

In 2011, McKinsey & Company said that **data science was going to become the key basis of competition**. Supporting new waves of **productivity, growth, and innovation**. In 2013, UPS announced that it was using data from customers, drivers, and vehicles, in a new route guidance system aimed to save time, money, and fuel. Initiatives like this support the statement that data science will fundamentally change the way businesses compete and operate.

How does a firm gain a competitive advantage? Let's take Netflix as an example. Netflix collects and analyzes massive amounts of data from millions of users, including which shows people are watching at what time a day when people pause, rewind, and fast-forward, and which shows directors and actors they search for. Netflix can be confident that a show will be a hit before filming even begins by analyzing users preference for certain directors and acting talent, and discovering which combinations people enjoy. Add this to the success of earlier versions of a show and you have a hit. For example, Netflix knew many of its users had streamed to the work of David Fincher. They also knew that films featuring Robin Wright had always done well, and that the British version of House of Cards was very successful. Netflix knew that significant numbers of people who liked Fincher also liked Wright. All this information combined to suggest that buying the series would be a good investment for the company. They were right. It was a huge hit. Thanks to data science, Netflix knows what people want before they do.

## How Data Science is saving lives

Using Data Science techniques to understand and analyze the large data sets available today has a huge impact on human lives. 

It can provide targeted information to help healthcare professionals give the best treatment to patients, or help predict natural disasters so that people can prepare early, and much more besides. In healthcare, data scientists use predictive analytics developed from data mining, data modeling, statistics, and machine learning to find the best options for patients.

This type of predictive analytics examines all known factors for a disease, including gene markers, associated conditions, and environmental factors. It then recommends appropriate tests, suitable trials, and any suggested treatments. Every individual physician has their own store of knowledge gained from their studies, interests, and experiences. Data science systems that use predictive analytics ensure that all physicians can also access the latest information about the disease, tests, and treatment plans, tailored to their specific patient. With this type of system, every physician has access to the same knowledge, and the best options can be consistently offered, improving patient outcomes.

For example, a study by the Boston Consulting Group and AdvaMedDx, an industry association of medical diagnostics companies, examined the barriers to the adoption of potentially lifesaving diagnostic tests for patients with a specific cancer and a particular gene marker. The study discovered that the biggest factor in the patient being offered a specific test was the patient’s oncologist, who may or may not have known about the test and its relationship to the gene marker. By **providing extra information through data science tools**, physicians can be made aware of the most helpful tests and treatments for a specific patient. 

There are many opportunities to explore other ways to **mine data**, such as from electronic medical records for different types of medical research. Schools such as the NorthShore University HealthSystem in suburban Chicago, a leader in the implementation of **Electronic Medical Records (EMR)** systems, now offer guidance on data mining. It is the first healthcare provider in America to be awarded the highest level of EMR deployment for both inpatient and outpatient care. This remarkable effort has generated much-anonymized data available for innovative analytics research.
Developing more sophisticated big data analytics capabilities helps healthcare organizations move from basic descriptive analytics towards **predictive insights**, thanks to data science.

In the field of Disaster Preparedness, the ability to save lives using Data Science tools has been under development for many years. The use of predictive analytics tools is improving and providing new data analysis in a multitude of ways, alerting populations to danger faster than ever before.
Large, **high-quality data sets can be used to predict the occurrence of numerous types of natural disasters**, which can be the difference between life and death for thousands of people. Earthquakes, hurricanes & tornados, floods, and volcanic eruptions can be predicted with the help of data science.
Recent research at the University of Warwick in the UK used social media content such as photos and keywords to track the development of floods, hurricanes and other weather events. When added to the information recorded by scientists and weather stations, this type of data can be used to improve the predictions for localised weather events.

Because the real benefit of this knowledge is so important, **schools are starting to include this type of data science education in their curriculum**. For instance, the University of Chicago Graham School offers a Master of Science course in Threat and Response Management.

Data science tools enable organizations to **analyse vast quantities of data** from widely different sources, and present that information in a way that allows data scientists to gain new knowledge, in some cases, saving hundreds of lives.

## The Final Deliverable
The **ultimate purpose** of analytics is to **communicate findings** to the concerned who might use these **insights to formulate policy or strategy**. Analytics summarize findings in tables and plots. The data scientist should then use the **insights to build the narrative to communicate the findings**. In academia, the final deliverable is in the form of essays and reports. Such deliverables are usually 1,000 to 7,000 words in length.

In consulting and business, the final deliverable takes on several forms. It can be a small document of fewer than 1,500 words illustrated with tables and plots, or it could be a comprehensive document comprising several hundred pages. Large consulting firms, such as McKinsey and Deloitte, I routinely generate analytics-driven reports to communicate their findings and, in the process, establish their expertise in specific knowledge domains.

Let's review the "United States Economic Forecast", a publication by the Deloitte University Press. This document serves as a good example for a deliverable that builds narrative from data and analytics. The 24-page report focuses on the state of the U.S. economy as observed in December 2014. The report opens with a grabber highlighting the fact that contrary to popular perception, the economic and job growth has been quite robust in the United States. The report is not merely a statement of facts.

In fact, it is a carefully crafted report that cites Voltaire and follows a distinct theme. The report focuses on the good news about the U.S. economy. These include the increased investment in manufacturing equipment in the U.S. and the likelihood of higher consumer consumption resulting from lower oil prices.

The Deloitte report uses time series plots to illustrate trends in markets. The GDP growth chart shows how the economy contracted during the Great Recession and has rebounded since then. The graphic presents four likely scenarios for the future. Another plot shows the changes in consumer spending. The accompanying narrative focuses on income inequality in the U.S. and refers to Thomas Pikkety's book on the same. The Deloitte report mentions many consumers did not experience an increase in their real incomes over the years, while they still maintained their level of spending. Other graphics focused on housing, business, and government sectors, international trade, labor, and financial markets, and prices. The appendix carries four tables documenting data for the four scenarios discussed in the report.

Deloitte's "United States Economic Forecast" serves the very purpose that its authors intended. The report uses data and analytics to generate the likely economic scenarios. It builds a powerful narrative in support of the thesis statement that the U.S. economy is doing much better than most would like to believe. At the same time, the report shows Deloitte to be a competent firm capable of analyzing economic data and prescribing strategies to cope with the economic challenges.

Now consider if we were to exclude the narrative from this report and presented the findings as a deck of PowerPoint slides with eight graphics and four tables. The PowerPoint slides would have failed to communicate the message that the authors carefully crafted in the report citing Piketty and Voltaire. I consider Deloitte's report a good example of storytelling with data and encourage you to read the report to decide for yourself whether the deliverable would have been equally powerful without the narrative.

Now, let us work backward from the Deloitte report. Before the authors started their analysis, they must have discussed the scope of the final deliverable. They would have deliberated the key message of the report and then looked for the data and analytics they needed to make their case. The initial planning and conceptualizing of the final deliverable is therefore extremely important for producing a compelling document. **Embarking on analytics, without due consideration to the final deliverable, is likely to result in a poor-quality document where the analytics and narrative would struggle to blend**.

## Lesson Summary

Let’s review what you’ve learned in this lesson about the power of data science applications and how organizations leverage this power to drive business goals, improve efficiency, make predictions, and even save lives. You also reviewed the process that you will follow as a data scientist to help your organization accomplish these ends.

- Why data science
All organizations ultimately use data science for the same reason— to **discover optimal solutions to existing problems**. But to discover these solutions, your organization should identify the problem and establish a clear understanding of it. 

- Measurement
Measurement is the first step for an organization to solve its problems using data. You need to **capture and gather your data**. If something is not measured, it’s challenging to improve or change it. If your organization isn’t capturing the data, help them to figure out how to capture it. Never overwrite old data – it’s always relevant and never gets old.

- Data strategy
Once you have the data, you can start looking at it and cleaning it. As a data scientist, it’s your job to help your organization **identify tools and develop an analysis strategy**. Consider case studies when customizing a potential solution. Identify your analysis tools, and then develop your machine learning and statistical models. It will take time for your organization to refine data strategy best practices, but the benefits are worth it.

- Recommendation engines
Everyone who uses the Internet generates mass amounts of data daily, often without being aware of it. Your company can leverage that data to reveal patterns. Take, for instance, a company like Amazon. You’ll notice that it starts making recommendations related to your search. That’s called a recommendation engine; data scientists build those engines using machine learning and statistical models.

- Informing business decisions
Companies like UPS use data science to inform their business decisions. They use data from customers, drivers, and vehicles to create routes for their drivers, making more efficient use of the drivers’ time, money, and fuel.  Uber uses data to put the correct number of drivers in the right place at the right time, for a price the rider is willing to pay. Initiatives like this show how data science fundamentally changes how businesses compete and operate. 

- Competitive advantages
Businesses also use data science to gain competitive advantages. Take streaming companies as an example. They collect and analyze massive amounts of data from millions of users, including which shows they watch and at what time of day. They detect when people pause, rewind, and fast-forward. They collect information such as which directors and actors they search for. A streaming company can **confidently predict the success of a show** before filming begins by thoroughly analyzing its users’ preferences and behaviors.

- Saving lives in healthcare
Beyond helping businesses with their bottom line, data science helps companies and organizations save lives. In healthcare, data scientists use predictive analytics developed from data mining, data modeling, statistics, and machine learning to find the best options for patients. This type of predictive analytics examines factors for a disease, including  gene markers, associated conditions, and environmental factors. Data scientists use their models to help physicians, recommend appropriate tests, suitable trials, and suggest treatments. Developing more extensive data analytics capabilities supports healthcare organizations move from basic descriptive analytics towards predictive insights, thanks to data science.

- Predict natural disasters
Data science tools enable organizations to analyze vast amounts of data from various sources. Large, high-quality data sets can help predict the occurrence of natural disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornados, floods, and volcanic eruptions. The data scientists present that information in a way that allows organizations to gain new understandings and, in some cases, save lives.

- Final deliverable
When presenting your findings, you will provide your organizations with a final deliverable that **explains and summarizes** their conclusions. In academia, the final deliverable comprises research papers and reports. You often present the final deliverable illustrated with tables and plots in consulting and business. You will generate analytics-driven reports to communicate your findings to your organization and, in the process, establish powerful, convincing, and evidence-based narratives.
